When Frantz Math us had formed the generous resolve of illuminating the 
world with his own light, a strange and undefinable calm entered into the 
depths of his soul. It was the eve of St. Boniface, towards six o clock 
in the evening; a splendid sun lit the valley of Graufthal, and relieved 
the motionless branches of the tall firs against the clear sky. 
 
The good man was seated in the old arm-chair of his forefathers, near the 
small casement, his eyes wandering over the silent little town stretched 
at the foot of the misty mountains. 
 
Peasants were mowing grass on the skirt of the forest; women, old Martha 
herself amongst them, armed with rakes, were turning the hay and singing 
old country airs. 
 
The Zinsel murmured softly in its pebbly bed; a low hum filled the air; 
long files of ducks were taking their way up the stream, and every now 
and then raised their nasal cry; fowls were sleeping under the shadow of 
walls, on the shafts of carts and implements of labour; chubby children 
were romping and amusing themselves on the thresholds of cottages; and 
watchdogs, their muzzles between their paws, gave themselves up to the 
overpowering heat of the day. 
 
This calm scene insensibly touched the heart of Math us; silent tears 
stole down his venerable cheeks; he took his already grey head between 
his hands, and, with his elbows on the window-ledge, wept like a child. 
 
A crowd of tender recollections rose to his mind. That rustic dwelling, 
the abode of his father this little garden, the trees of which he had 
cultivated, every plant in which he had sown this old oak furniture, 
embrowned by time all reminded him of his peaceful happiness, his habits, 
his friends, his infancy; and it almost seemed as if each of those 
inanimate objects appealed to him in touching accents not to desert 
them reproached him for his ingratitude, and commiserated him beforehand 
on his loneliness in the world. And the heart of Frantz Math us echoed 
all these voices, and at every recollection fresh tears streamed more 
abundantly from his eyes. 
